This thesis is the result of my graduation project. I started the project in
January 2014 and finished it in July 2014, a total track of 7 months of
iteratively planning, performing, observing, analysing, and writing. It
concludes the part-time Master programme Software Engineering at the University
of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The project has been performed at VNU Vacature Media, the company at which I am
employed at. VNU Vacature Media, since May 2012 a division of De Persgroep
Nederland, operates in the on-line recruitment market. It serves the largest
job boards in The Netherlands and Belgium, such as Intermediair, Nationale
Vacaturebank, Vacature.com, and References.be. The software supporting these
products are mostly open-source, that is why the evolution of open-source
software came to my interest for choosing this subject.

\section*{Acknowledgements}
There are some people I would like to thank that contributed to my project
in various ways. This thesis would not have been possible without them.

\paragraph{}
First, I would like to thank Brett Kelly, who was CTO at VNU Vacature Media at
the time I started the Master's programme, and Rutger Pannekoek, who is CTO of
VNU Vacature Media since 2013. Without them, I wouldn't be able to follow the
Master's programme together with my job in the first place.

Then, I would like to thank my colleagues Bas,
Boudewijn,
Danny,
Eugene,
Ewout,
Greg,
Hugo,
Jan-Willem,
Jeroen,
Jerry,
Joeri,
Johan,
Marc,
Marvin,
Merlijn,
Michiel,
Nienke,
Kalle,
Leonard,
Tim,
and Wouter (I am sorry if I forget anyone, but this counts for you too), you
were all great in supporting me and my research on the days that I was
physically present, but mentally absent.

I would also like to thank my parents, Johan and Carla Endenburg, who supported
me and taught me that ``when there's a will, there's a way''.

Additionally, I would like to thank Siim Karus for helping me replicating his
research. He has been very helpful, especially in the beginning of the project,
in providing me his scripts and insights in his data.

Last, but definitely not least, big thanks to my girlfriend Christine
Fr\"{o}ger, for all the love, support, patience, and encouragements to complete
this thesis and to take breaks too every now and then.\\[2em]

\noindent
Martijn Endenburg\\
Amsterdam, \today
