\chapter{Results}
\label{results}

\section{Data}
The data set of 250 projects was gathered in July 2013. It contains monthly
data points for each project up to June 2013.

The data set was tested for representativeness by using the tool by
\citet{nagappan}. The data set scored a 99.5\% representativeness to the tool's
master data of 20,028 projects tracked by Ohloh.

\paragraph{}
The final data set contains monthly evolution data of 250 distinct projects
having a total of 22,943 data points. The oldest project having 321 monthly
data points, the youngest having 14 monthly data points. The first data point
in the set is of October 1986.

\subsection{Dead projects}
\label{section:deads}
A total of 38 (15.2\%) projects complied to the definition of a dead project as
defined in section \ref{def:dead}. Manual verification of the 38 potential
dead projects using the project's websites, source code repositories, and
commit history up to April 2014, revealed that 21 (8.4\%) are still complying
to the definition of a dead project in April 2014.

\paragraph{}
The 21 dead projects and their $age\_in\_months$ at the moment of death as a
result of the verification are shown in Table \ref{table:deads}.

\input{tables/deads}

\paragraph{}
All, except one, of the projects in Table \ref{table:deads} are dead because it
was abandoned by the community of contributors. Except for project with ID
587204, which is still receiving updates, but at very slow and sporadic
intervals. However, since the updates do not involve code activity, it is
considered dead.

\paragraph{}
When looking into project \#317799, which is the youngest in this set and died
in its second month, it shows that this project has had a history of the slightest
change in its lines of code evolution. The project has had a total number of 7
commits during the time it is being tracked by Ohloh (since September 2011). A
total of 4 contributors have worked on the project since it was tracked. The
most recent commit was done in October 2011.

\paragraph{}
Project \#12547 is the oldest. It died after 142 tracked months and has
had its most recent commits in February 2012. A total of 10 contributors have
worked on this project since May 2000.

\paragraph{}
The special case project \#587204, is the only project that is not
abandoned by its (entire) community. The project has had 3 contributors over its
lifetime. One of them is still active every now and then. The most recent
commits were done in January 2014, the commits before that were in June 2012.
The commits involved updates in documentation, and the creation of a
configuration file for a continuous integration server. These commits do not
involve code changes.

The project died in July 2012, after 8 months since the first data point
tracked.

\paragraph{}
From the initial 38 projects, the remaining 17 projects complying to the
definition of dead (section \ref{def:dead}) appeared to be still alive. For 9
of the projects activity is very low or rapidly decreasing; 5 projects were
migrated to another source code repository; and for 3 projects the activity is
increasing after a long period of no activity.

\paragraph{}
The 9 projects with very low or decreasing activity show signs of 'dying'. Their
community is slowly but surely abandoning the project as can be seen by a
decrease of 35\% to 55\% of contributors, and/or commits.

The 5 migrated projects for which the tracking information is not updated at
Ohloh are lost. The tracking is stopped from the moment the project is
migrated. The tracking and analysis can be recovered by updating the source
code locations at Ohloh, but for this study the project is out of sight.

The 3 projects that have had no activity in a year, but after that show little
increase of activity are more difficult to explain. Manual evaluation showed
that there exist similar projects outside the data set that eventually die, but
there are also similar projects that eventually got 'resurrected'.



\section{Sequences and patterns}
The wavelet transform of the LOC signals of 250 projects resulted in 22,943
data points decomposed up to 7 levels into wavelet/shift and filter/scale
coefficients.

The similar sequence identification found 1,669,448 sequences that occurred
at least 2 times. A mere 16 sequences were found in wavelet/shift coefficients,
the other 1,669,432 sequences were found in filter/scale coefficients.

\paragraph{}
The second wavelet analysis step aggregated similar sequences across multiple
pairs together to form patterns. The detection of these 'popular sequences'
found 16,049 patterns. The patterns consist only of sequences of scale/filter
coefficients.

\paragraph{}
Some patterns that were found are shown in Figure \ref{figure:patterns_plots}.
The four graphs are plots of patterns recomposed onto the original signal,
however, transformed to \emph{relative LOC change }\rm to make them more
comparable in the graph.

The graphs all have multiple ($>$ 140) occurences of the pattern plotted of one
or more projects in the same graph. The graphs show that the sequences
composing a pattern have similar waveforms. Each graph contains a multiple of
plotted sequences as stated in the figure.

\input{figures/patterns_plots}

\noindent
Pattern no. 2 illustrates a pattern indicating no change in LOC for 8 months.

\paragraph{}
The patterns occurred between 5 and 1,512 times across the projects. On
average, a pattern occurs 104 times. A single pattern occurs in at least 1 and
at most 204 projects (36 projects on average). The pattern length is between 4
and 19 coefficients (on average 6) across decomposition levels 3 to 7.

On the 3\textsuperscript{th} level, the average pattern length is equal to 4
coefficients. Every subsequent level doubles the average pattern length. This
is expected as there are twice as many coefficients available. This means the
same pattern is detected at multiple levels. Additionally, it can be said that
a pattern has multiple levels.

\paragraph{}
Table \ref{table:pattern_counts} presents the patterns detected and occurring
across dead and alive projects. Recall the distinction between pattern
\emph{detection }\rm and pattern \emph{occurrence }\rm as described in section
\ref{def:pattern}.

\input{tables/pattern_counts}

\section{Pattern classification}
The classification of the patterns was done to distinguish different types of
patterns to be able to find evolutionary events.

\paragraph{}
At first, the 1,084 patterns detected in dead projects were selected. Then, the
similar sequences of these patterns were selected. For each of these similar
sequences, only the similar sequences occurring in other dead projects were
analysed and classified by type as described in section
\ref{section:patterns_dead}.

\paragraph{}
The resulting set of typed patterns is a mixture of the unique patterns detected
and occurring in dead projects. The mixture is needed to be able to tell with
confidence that the type of a pattern is correct according to the definitions.

A total number of 967 patterns were classified. The sizes of the pattern type
subsets are shown in Table \ref{table:pattern_type_counts}. For each subset, it
is stated in how many dead projects a pattern of that type was found.

\input{tables/pattern_type_counts}

\noindent
In search of patterns that may lead to the end of code evolution, patterns of
type A will be most interesting, because these patterns last until the end of
evolution data of dead projects.

\begin{comment}
- Factual results
- Tables and figures for clarification

This chapter presents and clarifies the results obtained during the research.
The focus should be on the factual results, not the interpretation or
discussion. Tables and graphics should be used to increase the clarity of the
results where applicable.
Have a look at the the results chapter in this example thesis on Paulâ€™s
homepage\footnote{http://homepages.cwi.nl/~paulk/thesesMasterSoftwareEngineering/2006/ArnoldLankamp.pdf}.
\end{comment}
